---
layout: post
title: Physical.media DevBlog 01 - Tracking Music
---
So, I'm working on an album release website after not really being pleased with any that were out there currently. [Album Reminder](http://www.albumreminder.com/) used to be pretty decent, but it has been broken for the past few weeks (only 1-2 new albums have been added). I tried emailing the developer and never heard back.

There are a couple other contenders on the market, probably the best of which is [Beathound](http://beathound.com/) (who have a rad logo). They've got a cool feature where you can upload your iTunes library xml file and get customized alerts based on artists you listen to already. They also have a nice discography listing for each artist when you click on an album. However, I like to use album release lists as new music discovery, so I'd like some more information... like genre, maybe a review, related artists. I need to know about each release. Also, Beathound says they get their information from iTunes, so they've got WAY too many albums listed... many of which are just singles, or duplicates (both the regular and deluxe editions of an album). I'd like things to be a bit more tailored than that (like Album Reminder used to be).

So, on to making my own. It will eventually live at [Physical.media](http://physical.media/) (That's too good of a domain NOT to snatch up instantly). Before I get too deep, I had to find out if I could even pull the data I wnated from an online source. There are several music databases online that have API's ([MusicBrainz](https://musicbrainz.org/) is a big one), but I need to be able to list albums by release, in reverse chronological order, without being overwhelmed by junk releases. MusicBrainz can give me a ton of information once I know the name of an actual album, but can't gather recent releases for me.

My next thought was iTunes. iTunes has an RSS feed generator, where you can create an RSS feed listing new releases. Sweet! But, the catch is that the feed is limited to 100 releases. Looking at the RSS feed right now, that doenst' even cover through last Tuesday (new music day). This feed might end up working out if it was checked nightly, but my fear is that we'd end up missing releases on any given Tuesday because more than 100 albums came out. That's no good. Also, just like with Beathound, a good chunk of these releases are not actually anything you'd want to see on an album release website, and there's not really a good way to say "no one has ever heard of this artist" programmatically.

I kept looking, and found that Metacritic [lists album releases by date](http://www.metacritic.com/browse/albums/release-date/new-releases). Metacritic doesn't have an API, but the page URL is standard and could be very easily scraped. Plus, Metacritic only lists a small number of albums, not the deluge that iTunes takes in. In practice, this Metacritic list might turn out to be *too* limiting, but scanning down through the past few weeks, they seem to be striking the same balance I wanted to achieve when leaving out the smaller releases.

Great! So scraping the new releases page on Metacritic is going to be my source of album releases, and I'll be using the [Last.fm API](http://www.last.fm/api) to get more information about each album and artist. The Last.fm API is fantastic, and I'll use it for album art, description, track listing, finding similar artists, getting purchase links, and more.

So, that means that collecting the release data, and populating it with the correct info is definitely possible.  Now to build it!
